manuscript/01.abstract.md, before:

## Abstract {.page_break_before}

Systems serology measurements provide a more comprehensive view of humoral immunity by comprehensively profiling both the antigen binding and Fc properties of antibodies. Identifying patterns in these measurements will help to guide vaccine and therapeutic antibody development, alongside improving our understanding of disorders in humoral immunity. Furthermore, consistent patterns across diseases may reflect conserved regulatory mechanisms; recognizing these may help to combine vaccines, antibody-based interventions, and other immunotherapies to maximize protection. A common feature of systems serology studies is structured biophysical profiling across disease-relevant antigen targets, properties of antibodies' interation with the immune system, and serological samples. These are typically produced alongside additional measurements that are not antigen-specific. Here, we report a new form of tensor factorization, total tensor-matrix factorization (TMTF), which can greatly reduce this data into consistently observed patterns by recognizing the structure of these data. TMTF outperforms standard methods like principal components analysis in the extent of reduction possible. Data reduction in turn improves prediction of immune functional responses, classification of subjects based on their HIV-1 control, and interpretation of these resulting models. Interpretability is improved specifically through (1) further data reduction, (2) separation of constant region from antigen-binding effects, and (3) recognizing consistent patterns across individual measurements. Therefore, we propose that TMTF will be an effective general strategy for exploring and using systems serology.

## Summary points

- Structured decomposition provides substantial data reduction without loss of information.
- Predictions based on decomposed factors are more accurate and robust to missing measurements.
- Decomposition structure improves the interpretability of modeling results.
- Decomposed factors represent meaningful patterns in the HIV humoral response.

Commit message:

Text edits (#222)
* First

* Edits

* More edits

* More edits

* More edits

* More edits

* More edits

* More edits

* Spelling

* Edits

* Grammar

* Update 01.abstract.md

Co-authored-by: Aaron Meyer <git@asmlab.org>

manuscript/01.abstract.md, after:

## Abstract {.page_break_before}

Systems serology measurements provide a comprehensive view of humoral immunity by profiling both the antigen-binding and Fc properties of antibodies. Identifying patterns in these measurements will help to guide vaccine and therapeutic antibody development, and improve our understanding of disorders. Furthermore, consistent patterns across diseases may reflect conserved regulatory mechanisms; recognizing these may help to combine modalities such as vaccines, antibody-based interventions, and other immunotherapies to maximize protection. A common feature of systems serology studies is structured biophysical profiling across disease-relevant antigen targets, properties of antibodies' interaction with the immune system, and serological samples. These are typically produced alongside additional measurements that are not antigen-specific. Here, we report a new form of tensor factorization, total tensor-matrix factorization (TMTF), which can greatly reduce these data into consistently observed patterns by recognizing the structure of these data. We use a previous study of HIV-infected subjects as an example. TMTF outperforms standard methods like principal components analysis in the extent of reduction possible. Data reduction, in turn, improves the prediction of immune functional responses, classification of subjects based on their HIV control status, and interpretation of these resulting models. Interpretability is improved specifically through further data reduction, separation of the constant region from antigen-binding effects, and recognizing consistent patterns across individual measurements. Therefore, we propose that TMTF will be an effective general strategy for exploring and using systems serology.

## Summary points

- Structured decomposition provides substantial data reduction without loss of information.
- Predictions based on decomposed factors are accurate and robust to missing measurements.
- Decomposition structure improves the interpretability of modeling results.
- Decomposed factors represent meaningful patterns in the HIV humoral response.
