## Abstract {.page_break_before}

Systems serology measurements provide a comprehensive view of humoral immunity by profiling both the antigen-binding and Fc properties of antibodies. Identifying patterns in these measurements will help to guide vaccine and therapeutic antibody development, and improve our understanding of disorders. Furthermore, consistent patterns across diseases may reflect conserved regulatory mechanisms; recognizing these may help to combine modalities such as vaccines, antibody-based interventions, and other immunotherapies to maximize protection. A common feature of systems serology studies is structured biophysical profiling across disease-relevant antigen targets, properties of antibodies' interaction with the immune system, and serological samples. These are typically produced alongside additional measurements that are not antigen-specific. Here, we report a new form of tensor factorization, total matrix-tensor factorization (CMTF), which can greatly reduce these data into consistently observed patterns by recognizing the structure of these data. We use a previous study of HIV-infected subjects as an example. CMTF outperforms standard methods like principal components analysis in the extent of reduction possible. Data reduction, in turn, improves the prediction of immune functional responses, classification of subjects based on their HIV control status, and interpretation of these resulting models. Interpretability is improved specifically by applying further data reduction, separation of the Fc from antigen-binding effects, and recognizing consistent patterns across individual measurements. Therefore, we propose that CMTF will be an effective general strategy for exploring and using systems serology.

## Summary points

- Structured decomposition provides substantial data reduction without loss of information.
- Predictions based on decomposed factors are accurate and robust to missing measurements.
- Decomposition structure improves the interpretability of modeling results.
- Decomposed factors represent meaningful patterns in the HIV humoral response.

## Keywords

Antibody, systems serology, effector function, tensor decomposition, HIV
