## Introduction

Whether during a natural infection, therapeutic vaccination, or an exogenously administered antibody therapy, antibody-mediated protection is a central component of the immune system. While the unique property of antibodies is conceptually simple—they undergo affinity enrichment toward specific antigens—the mechanisms of resulting protection are mediated through a network of interactions. Therapies are often optimized based upon the titer or neutralizing capacity of the antibodies they deliver. However, many of the mechanisms for antibody-mediated protection occur through secondary interactions with the immune system via an antibody’s fragment-crystallizable (Fc) region. While more challenging to quantify and identify as the mechanism of protective immunity, these immune system responses, such as antibody-dependent cellular toxicity [@PMID:25215485; @PMID:17805298], complement deposition [@PMID:30120121], cellular phagocytosis [@PMID:24980799], and respiratory burst [@PMID:20360847] are known to be just as or more important in many diseases.

A suite of recent technologies promises to broaden our view of antibody-mediated protection as the microarray did so for gene expression. Systems serology aims to broadly profile the humoral immune response by quantifying both the antigen binding and immune interaction of antibodies in parallel [@PMID:29139548]. In these assays, antibodies are first separated based on their binding to a panel of disease-relevant antigens [@PMID:23023091]. Next, the binding of those antibodies to a panel of immune receptors is quantified. Other molecular properties of the disease-specific antibody fraction that affect immune engagement, such as glycosylation, may be quantified in parallel in an antigen-specific or -generic manner [@PMID:23023091; @PMID:25523925]. By accounting for the two necessary events for effector response—antigen binding and immune receptor engagement—these measurements have proven to be highly predictive of effector cell-elicited responses and of overall antibody-elicited immune protection [@PMID:29581149].

Though systems serology provides a major advancement in our ability to analyze the antibody-elicited immune response, analysis of these data is in a nascent stage. Standard machine learning methods, such as regularized regression, principal components analysis, and partial least squares regression have been effective in identifying highly predictive immune correlates of protection [@PMID:25874406; @DOI:10.15252/msb.20177881]. However, identifying how specific molecular changes give rise to protection remains challenging. First, because many of the measurements are overlapping in the molecules they quantify or measure co-dependent processes, much of the data is highly inter-correlated [@PMID:31033729; @PMID:26544943]. Particularly when analyzing polyclonal antibody responses such as those which arise in vaccination or natural infection, protection may arise through single or combinations of molecular species and features within the antibody response, through either individual or combinations of antigens [@PMID:30177821; @PMID:26745376]. Ultimately, improvements in our ability to identify patterns in these data, and how they relate to protection, should span the contribution of individual molecular changes to overall immune protection with mechanistic detail. To date, no methods have provided a means to visualize the variation in serology measurements in their totality.

While systems serology measurements include a variety of different assays to quantify humoral response, a common overall structure exists to the data. The vast majority of the measurements quantify the extent to which an antibody bridges all pairs of target antigen and receptor panels, across a set of individuals [@PMID:29139548]. These measurements, therefore, can be thought of as a three-dimensional dataset, where every number in this cube of data represents a single measurement (FIG). Then, separately from these measurements, some antigen-generic properties of the humoral response, such as antibody glycosylation, may be assessed [@PMID:25523925; @DOI:10.1172/JCI65708]. With data of three or more dimensions, a family of methods called tensor factorization provides a generalization of matrix decomposition methods like principal components analysis (PCA) [@doi:10.1137/07070111X]. These methods are especially effective at data reduction when measurements have meaningful multi-dimensional features, such as time-course measurements [@PMID:32868914]. Like PCA, tensor decomposition methods, when appropriately matched to the structure of data, help to visualize its variation, reduce noise, impute missing values, and reduce dimensionality [@PMID:18003902].

In this work, we use the structure of systems serology measurements to improve its visualization, infer missing values, and predict functional immune features. We first identify that systematic non-linearities in the measurements can be corrected for improved normalization. Having corrected these measurements, we then develop a novel tensor factorization approach—total matrix-tensor factorization (TMTF)—to decompose these measurements into consistent patterns across patients, immunologic features, and antigen targets. Inspecting these factors reveals interpretable patterns in the humoral response, and these pattern’s abundance across patients predicts functional immune responses and patient grouping based on their HIV infection state. Importantly, TMTF significantly improves these predictions compared to methods that do not recognize the structure of these data. This approach, therefore, provides a very general data-driven strategy for improved systems serology analysis.
