## Discussion

We show here that structured data decomposition can improve our view of systems serology measurements. Specifically, this approach recognizes that measurements and their variation take place across distinct and separable dimensions—namely antigen binding and immune receptor engagement. Using this property, we identify that these measurements can be reduced more efficiently (Fig. {@fig:compress}), can be made robust to missing values (Fig. {@fig:impute}), and that properties of the immune system and infection can be more accurately predicted (Fig. @fig:prediction). Finally, this form of dimensionality reduction provides a clearer interpretation of the resulting models (Fig. {@fig:factors}, {@fig:import}), as it accounts for the high degree of inter-correlation across each dimension.

The key advancement of TMTF is separating the contribution of antigen from immune receptor binding. This separation enables the improved data reduction by avoiding repetition of the antigens for each receptor measurement or vice-versa in the factors (Fig. {@fig:compress}). Separation is also what allowed us to identify that just 8–10 consistent patterns exist within HIV subject's serology (Fig. {@fig:factors}). Remarkably, even a multi-factorial change in the relationship between HIV and the immune response, like progression, could be accurately captured by a single pattern within the serology measurements (Fig. {@fig:factors}B, {@fig:import}B). While each functional measurement was predicted through a combination of factors, factor 6 was overwhelmingly essential for predicting every function except ADCD (Fig. {@fig:factors}B). This suggests that these functions are not separately tuned through specific glycans or isotypes. However, one limitation of the current immune functional assessments and glycan measurements is that they are not antigen-specific; future refinements to these measurements may reveal more precise regulation [@PMID:30120121], particularly as certain glycan forms are known to be uniquely potent inhibitors [@PMID:18815375; @DOI:10.1126/science.1129594].

Further improvements to the decomposition approach will continue to improve the predictions, interpretation, and robustness of systems serology data. While each antigen is treated similarly along one dimension, antigenic sites and strains could be separated into distinct dimensions before decomposition. This could lead to further data reduction (e.g. both strains of p24 and gp41 antigens share an identical signature; Fig. {@fig:factors}C), and simplify comparisons between strains. Interestingly, many of the subject components were highly correlated, indicating that components mostly separated due to differences in explaining the antigen and receptor dimensions (Fig. {@fig:factors}). As the subjects dimension results in the largest factor matrix (Fig. {@fig:factors}A), nested PCA or other factorization of it could easily reduce the data another two-fold. One current challenge is that some effect—possibly a technical artifact such as dilution differences—leads to non-linearities between receptors in the FcγR binding measurements (Fig. {@fig:binding}). Tensor generalizations of non-linear data reduction methods, like kernel-based factorization or autoencoders, could help to account for these patterns [@doi:10.1145/1553374.1553452]. To the extent that these different factors reflect differences in the avidity versus affinity of binding, factorization using a mechanistic binding model may help to separate these contributions [@PMID:29960887]. Conversely, TMTF is sure to have wider applications in other comprehensive molecular profiling experiments. Many datasets exist where measurements are made across varying dimensionality, such as with and without a temporal axis, and one wishes to find conserved patterns across the entirety of the data. For example, TMTF could be used to look for patterns across paired time-course and endpoint single-cell measurements [@PMID:28396000].

While effective dimensionality reduction improves our ability to use these measurements, future advancements will further improve our view of antibody-mediated protection. As mentioned above, systems serology in a way provides a view of antibody-mediated immunity akin to the microarray for gene expression data. The analogy reveals a few modeling advancements that will help leverage this data. One valuable property of TMTF is that it separates the immune receptor and antigen-binding patterns within the data. This will enable surveys for common Fc response patterns across diseases because these different datasets would still share this axis. This “transfer learning” could therefore help to identify common patterns of immune dysregulation. With more extensive profiling of the various glycosylation and isotype Fc forms, it would be possible to fix the receptor axis of the decomposition, to match new measurements to specific known immunologic patterns. These pattern-matching approaches would be much like gene expression enrichment analysis for gene expression [@DOI:10.1073/pnas.0506580102]. Finally, the binding interactions of antibodies, while they produce combinatorial complexity, are a simple set of antigen and receptor binding. Ultimately, one should be able to apply multivalent binding models to mechanistically model the interactions within serum [@PMID:29960887; @perelson]. Such a mechanistic view would not only allow us to exactly identify mechanisms of antibody-mediated protection, but help to guide more advanced multi-modality therapeutic interventions, like monoclonal inhibitors or enhancers of antibody response that cooperate with the cocktail of endogenous antibodies. 

Advancements outside systems serology will ultimately work alongside these measurements to expand our view of immunity. Much like how systems serology has served to profile antibody-mediated protection, global profiling methods are helping to globally characterize T cell-mediated immunity [@PMID:24855945]. These technologies, alongside more traditional technologies to profile cytokine response, gene expression, and other molecular features, promise to provide a truly comprehensive view of immunity. Integrating these data will require dimensionality reduction techniques that recognize the structure of these data alone and in combination. Factorization methods will be a natural solution to this challenge, due to their scalability, flexibility, and interpretability [@PMID:18003902].
