manuscript/06.methods.md, before:

## Methods

All analysis was implemented in Python v3.8 and can be found at <https://github.com/meyer-lab/systemsSerology>.

### Subject cohort, antibody purification, effector function assays, and glycan analysis

All experimental measurements were used unmodified from prior work [@DOI:10.15252/msb.20177881]. The only exception is the gp140 antigen from the HXBc2 strain. This was found to be scaled much larger than the other antigens, and so was multiplied by 0.000001 to put it on a similar scale to other antigens. A small number of receptor binding measurements were found to have very large negative values. These were taken to be outliers and clipped to 0.0. HIV subjects were classified into four categories: untreated progressors, who failed to control viremia without combined anti-retroviral therapy (cART), treated progressors, who similarly failed to control viremia without cART but were on it for the study measurements, viremic controllers, who possessed a viral load between 50 and 2,000 RNA copies/mL without cART, and elite controllers, who had less than 50 copies/mL without cART. These were then grouped into two classifications: controllers (EC and VC) versus progressors (UP and TP); and viremic (UP and VC) versus non-viremic (TP and EC).

### Total Matrix-Tensor Factorization

We decomposed the systems serology measurements into a reduced series of Kruskal-formatted factors. Tensor operations were defined using Tensorly [@arXiv:1610.09555]. To capture the structure of the data, where the majority of measurements were made for specific antigens, but gp120-associated antibody glycosylation was measured in an antigen-generic form, we separated these two types of data into a separate 3-mode tensor and matrix, with shared subject-dimension factors:

$$X_{antigen} \approx \sum_{r=1}^R a_r \circ b_r \circ c_r$$

$$X_{glycosylation} \approx \sum_{r=1}^R a_r \circ d_r$$
where $a_r$, $b_r$, and $c_r$ are vectors indicating variation along the subject, receptor, and antigen dimensions, respectively. $d_r$ is a vector indicating variation along glycan forms within the glycan matrix.

Decomposition was performed through an alternating least squares (ALS) scheme [@doi:10.1137/07070111X]. Each least squares step was performed separately for each slice along a given mode, with missing values removed. While this made each iteration step much slower, convergence was much faster as a consequence of requiring fewer iterations. Missing values did not strictly follow a tensor slice pattern, and so alternative approaches such as a sampling Khatri-Rao product were disregarded as they would still require iterative filling [@doi:10.1137/17M1112303]. This strategy required many more iterations due to a high fraction of missing values (43%). The ALS iterations were repeated until the improvement in R2X over the last ten iterations was less than $1\times 10^{-7}$.

To enforce shared factors along the subject dimension, the antigen tensor and glycan matrix were concatenated after tensor unfolding. The Khatri-Rao product of the receptor and antigen factors was similarly concatenated to the glycan factors. The least-squares solution on this axis therefore solved for minimizing the squared error across both data compendiums. The other dimensions were solved using a standard ALS approach.

<!-- TODO: Write out equations for ALS and the shared dimension. -->

### Reconstruction Fidelity

To calculate the fidelity of our factorization results, we calculated the percent variance explained. First, the total variance was calculated by summing the variance in both the antigen-specific tensor and glycan matrix:
$$v_{total} = \left \| X_{antigen}  \right \| + \left \| X_{glycosylation}  \right \|$$
Any missing values were ignored in the variance calculation throughout. Then, the remaining variance after taking the difference between the original data and its reconstruction was calculated:
$$v_{r,antigen} = \left \| X_{antigen} - \hat X_{antigen}  \right \|$$
An analogous equation was used for the glycan matrix. Finally, the fraction of variance explained was calculated:
$$R2X = 1 - \frac{v_{r,antigen} + v_{r,glycosylation}}{v_{total}}$$
Where indicated, this quantity was calculated for values left out to assess the fidelity of imputation. In these cases this quantity was only calculated on those left out values, and indicated as Q2X.

### Cross-Validation

We employed a 10-fold cross-validation strategy to evaluate each prediction model. Cross-validation was stratified by class for classification. Unlike in earlier work [@DOI:10.15252/msb.20177881], all subjects were randomly shuffled before cross-validation to prevent the influence of subject ordering in the dataset. We found that sharing the cross-validation fold structure between hyperparameter selection and model benchmarking led to consistent overfitting. For the factorization-based predictions, the better performing of either a linear or Gaussian process model was used. The linear model only showed superior performance when predicting ADCD.

### Logistic Regression / Elastic Net

Logistic regression and elastic net were performed using `LogisticRegressionCV` and `ElasticNetCV` implemented within `scikit-learn` [@scikit]. Both methods used 10-fold cross-validation to select the regularization strength with smallest cross-validation error, and a fraction of l1 regularization equal to 0.8 to match previous results [@DOI:10.15252/msb.20177881]. Logistic regression used the SAGA solver [@arXiv:1407.0202]. Elastic net regression was set to normalize the data before model assembly.

### Gaussian Process Regression / Classification

Gaussian process regression or classification was performed where indicated using the implementation within `scikit-learn` [@scikit]. Regression was performed with output scaling. In both cases, an anisotropic radial basis function kernel was used with a constant scaling factor and additive white noise. The kernel's parameters were left unbounded.

### Principal Components Analysis

Principal components analysis was performed using the implementation within the Python package `statsmodels` and the SVD-based solver. Missing values were handled by an expectation-maximization approach, wherein they were filled in with the imputed value. This filling step was performed up to 100 iterations until convergence as determined by a tolerance of $1 \times 10^{-5}$.

### Missingness Imputation

To evaluate the ability of factorization to impute missing data, we introduced new missing values by removing chords from the antigen-specific tensor, and then looking at the variance explained on reconstruction (Q2X). More specifically, fifteen randomly selected receptor-antigen pairs were entirely removed and marked as missing across all subjects. TMTF decomposition was performed as described above, and then these left out data were compared to the reconstructed values. This process was repeated for the same chords across varying numbers of components.

Commit message:

Z-score the measurements across subjects (#260)
* z-score samples

* Change text

* Updates

* Last pickles

manuscript/06.methods.md, after:

## Methods

All analysis was implemented in Python v3.8 and can be found at <https://github.com/meyer-lab/systemsSerology>.

### Subject cohort, antibody purification, effector function assays, and glycan analysis

All experimental measurements were used unmodified from prior work [@DOI:10.15252/msb.20177881]. A small number of receptor binding measurements were found to have very large negative values. These were taken to be outliers and clipped to 0.0. Each measurement was then centered and variance normalized across subjects. HIV subjects were classified into four categories: untreated progressors, who failed to control viremia without combined anti-retroviral therapy (cART), treated progressors, who similarly failed to control viremia without cART but were on it for the study measurements, viremic controllers, who possessed a viral load between 50 and 2,000 RNA copies/mL without cART, and elite controllers, who had less than 50 copies/mL without cART. These were then grouped into two classifications: controllers (EC and VC) versus progressors (UP and TP); and viremic (UP and VC) versus non-viremic (TP and EC).

### Total Matrix-Tensor Factorization

We decomposed the systems serology measurements into a reduced series of Kruskal-formatted factors. Tensor operations were defined using Tensorly [@arXiv:1610.09555]. To capture the structure of the data, where the majority of measurements were made for specific antigens, but gp120-associated antibody glycosylation was measured in an antigen-generic form, we separated these two types of data into a separate 3-mode tensor and matrix, with shared subject-dimension factors:

$$X_{antigen} \approx \sum_{r=1}^R a_r \circ b_r \circ c_r$$

$$X_{glycosylation} \approx \sum_{r=1}^R a_r \circ d_r$$
where $a_r$, $b_r$, and $c_r$ are vectors indicating variation along the subject, receptor, and antigen dimensions, respectively. $d_r$ is a vector indicating variation along glycan forms within the glycan matrix.

Decomposition was performed through an alternating least squares (ALS) scheme [@doi:10.1137/07070111X]. Each least squares step was performed separately for each slice along a given mode, with missing values removed. While this made each iteration step much slower, convergence was much faster as a consequence of requiring fewer iterations. Missing values did not strictly follow a tensor slice pattern, and so alternative approaches such as a sampling Khatri-Rao product were disregarded as they would still require iterative filling [@doi:10.1137/17M1112303]. This strategy required many more iterations due to a high fraction of missing values (43%). The ALS iterations were repeated until the improvement in R2X over the last ten iterations was less than $1\times 10^{-7}$.

To enforce shared factors along the subject dimension, the antigen tensor and glycan matrix were concatenated after tensor unfolding. The Khatri-Rao product of the receptor and antigen factors was similarly concatenated to the glycan factors. The least-squares solution on this axis therefore solved for minimizing the squared error across both data compendiums. The other dimensions were solved using a standard ALS approach.

<!-- TODO: Write out equations for ALS and the shared dimension. -->

### Reconstruction Fidelity

To calculate the fidelity of our factorization results, we calculated the percent variance explained. First, the total variance was calculated by summing the variance in both the antigen-specific tensor and glycan matrix:
$$v_{total} = \left \| X_{antigen}  \right \| + \left \| X_{glycosylation}  \right \|$$
Any missing values were ignored in the variance calculation throughout. Then, the remaining variance after taking the difference between the original data and its reconstruction was calculated:
$$v_{r,antigen} = \left \| X_{antigen} - \hat X_{antigen}  \right \|$$
An analogous equation was used for the glycan matrix. Finally, the fraction of variance explained was calculated:
$$R2X = 1 - \frac{v_{r,antigen} + v_{r,glycosylation}}{v_{total}}$$
Where indicated, this quantity was calculated for values left out to assess the fidelity of imputation. In these cases this quantity was only calculated on those left out values, and indicated as Q2X.

### Cross-Validation

We employed a 10-fold cross-validation strategy to evaluate each prediction model. Cross-validation was stratified by class for classification. Unlike in earlier work [@DOI:10.15252/msb.20177881], all subjects were randomly shuffled before cross-validation to prevent the influence of subject ordering in the dataset. We found that sharing the cross-validation fold structure between hyperparameter selection and model benchmarking led to consistent overfitting. For the factorization-based predictions, the better performing of either a linear or Gaussian process model was used. The linear model only showed superior performance when predicting ADCD.

### Logistic Regression / Elastic Net

Logistic regression and elastic net were performed using `LogisticRegressionCV` and `ElasticNetCV` implemented within `scikit-learn` [@scikit]. Both methods used 10-fold cross-validation to select the regularization strength with smallest cross-validation error, and a fraction of l1 regularization equal to 0.8 to match previous results [@DOI:10.15252/msb.20177881]. Logistic regression used the SAGA solver [@arXiv:1407.0202]. Elastic net regression was set to normalize the data before model assembly.

### Gaussian Process Regression / Classification

Gaussian process regression or classification was performed where indicated using the implementation within `scikit-learn` [@scikit]. Regression was performed with output scaling. In both cases, an anisotropic radial basis function kernel was used with a constant scaling factor and additive white noise. The kernel's parameters were left unbounded.

### Principal Components Analysis

Principal components analysis was performed using the implementation within the Python package `statsmodels` and the SVD-based solver. Missing values were handled by an expectation-maximization approach, wherein they were filled in with the imputed value. This filling step was performed up to 100 iterations until convergence as determined by a tolerance of $1 \times 10^{-5}$.

### Missingness Imputation

To evaluate the ability of factorization to impute missing data, we introduced new missing values by removing chords from the antigen-specific tensor, and then looking at the variance explained on reconstruction (Q2X). More specifically, fifteen randomly selected receptor-antigen pairs were entirely removed and marked as missing across all subjects. TMTF decomposition was performed as described above, and then these left out data were compared to the reconstructed values. This process was repeated for the same chords across varying numbers of components.
